5 Times Human Race Came Close to Extinction
Today, we dream about launching into space
to get enough room for our collective population.
As we don’t have fears from common illnesses,
and as many of us don’t have to worry about
food, shelter, or water, it seems like nothing
can stop us.
However, we weren’t always so robust and
safe.
There were several times in history during
which humans nearly went extinct.
Hi!
I am Mister Mysterious, and I will be guiding
you through events that caused our civilization
to chance its course.
Here are five of the closest calls we had
to human extinction.
Five: The Toba Super-Eruption
The Toba supereruption was a supervolcanic
eruption that occurred 75,000 years ago; Believed
to be one of the Earth’s largest known eruptions.
As such, this event changed the course of
human history by severely reducing the human
population.
The Toba eruption occurred at the present
location of Lake Toba, in Indonesia.
Today, there is a scenic landscape with a
picturesque lake at its center where locals
can still feel occasional slight tremors that
hint at the violence simmering below.
Numerous scientific theories suggest that
the Toba volcanic eruption plunged the planet
into a 6 to 10-year volcanic winter that endangered
the world’s human population, reducing it
to 10,000 surviving individuals.
This long winter period largely destroyed
the food sources of humans, and also destroyed
vegetation in the tropical rainforest belt
and in monsoonal regions.
However, the exact geographic distribution
of human populations at the time of the eruption
is not known, and surviving populations may
have lived in Africa before migrating to other
parts of the world.
In fact, there are indications that the major
migration from Africa happened close to 75,000
years ago, which is consistent with the dating
of the Toba eruption, and which is why scientists
believe that these events are connected.
An international research team, led by Oxford
University, tried to discover more about this
event.
The seven-year project examined the environment
around the volcano where humans had lived,
their stone tools and animal bones of the
time.
The team suggests that a mosaic of ecological
settings was present, as well as that some
areas around the volcano experienced a relatively
rapid recovery after the event.
Still, we may never exactly know what exactly
happened 75,000 years ago, and if our civilization
was really in danger.
However, this is a reminder that a worldwide
environmental catastrophe could change our
course in an instant.
Four: Spanish Flu Pandemic
Almost a hundred years ago, in the little
town of Brevig Mission (Alaska), a deadly
new virus struck quickly and brutally.
It killed 90 percent of the town’s Inuit
population, leaving a large number of corpses
that few survivors were willing to touch.
The Alaskan territorial government hired gold
miners to travel to flu-ravaged towns and
bury the dead.
Little did they know that those bodies will
be used throughout the next century in an
effort to study one of the deadliest influenza
pandemics, today known as the Spanish Flu.
The Spanish flu first appeared in 1918 and
took up to 100 million lives in just two years.
It is believed that up to 40 percent of the
world’s population was stricken with this
flu.
Unusually for this kind of virus, the pandemic
afflicted young people, who were healthy previously.
Today, we know that the disease triggered
an overreaction by the immune system, thus
turning a young person’s immune system against
itself.
Victim’s lungs overflowed with fluid, while
their skin became mottled and discolored.
Those who weren’t able to recover drowned
in their own bodily fluids.
Even in areas where mortality was low, people
were very afraid.
Numerous communities closed all stores, and
numerous health-care workers declined to tend
the sick.
The gravediggers didn’t want to bury the
dead, which is why mass graves were dug by
steam shovels and bodies were buried without
coffins in many cases.
Horrifying as the flu was, its reign of terror
was brief.
In less than two years, the disease had largely
disappeared.
However, its survivors and their children
often experienced lifelong health problems.
In addition to that, the Spanish flu came
right after the World War I, which took the
lives of over 17 million individuals.
To maintain morale, wartime censors minimized
early reports of the Spanish flue in countries
like Germany, Britain, France, and the United
States.
Still, newspapers were free to report the
pandemic’s effects in neutral Spain, creating
a false impression that this flu originates
from Spain.
The truth is that we still don’t know much
about the origins of the Spanish flu, and
there are many reports that mention France,
Austria, and even China.
Three: Norwegian Rocket Incident
The Norwegian Rocket Incident occurred when
a team of Norwegian and American scientists
launched a scientific rocket from the Andøya
Rocket Range in 1995.
This rocket carried equipment used to study
the Aurora Borealis over Svalbard in Norway
and flew on a high northbound trajectory,
which included an air corridor that stretches
from nuclear missile silos in North Dakota,
all the way to the Russian capital city of
Moscow.
During its flight, the scientific rocket reached
an altitude of more than 900 miles, which
forced Russian nuclear forces to react.
This incident occurred in the post-Cold War
era when many Russians were very suspicious
of the United States and NATO.
The Russian military received readings from
an early warning radar station in Murmansk
Oblast and believed that the rocket’s trajectory
is a possible attack by missiles from the
U.S. submarines.
This event resulted in a full alert being
passed up through the military chain of command
all the way to President Boris Yeltsin.
The “nuclear briefcase” was used to authorize
nuclear launch, and Yeltsin activated his
“nuclear keys” for the first time.
After a while, Russian observers were able
to determine that the rocket was heading away
from Russian airspace and was not a threat.
The rocket fell back to the ground as planned,
24 minutes after launch.
Prior to this event, the Norwegian and American
scientists had notified numerous countries
(including Russia) of their intention to launch
a high-altitude scientific experiment aboard
a rocket; However, the information was not
passed to the Russian radar technicians.
As a result, notification and disclosure protocols
have been re-evaluated and redesigned.
Two: Cuban Missile Crisis
In October 1962, an American U-2 spy plane
secretly photographed nuclear missile sites
being built by the Soviet Union on the island
of Cuba.
This forced President John F. Kennedy to place
a naval blockade, or a ring of ships, around
Cuba in an effort to prevent the Soviets from
bringing in more military supplies.
The U.S. President demanded the removal of
the missiles already there and the destruction
of the sites.
This was a 13-day confrontation between the
United States and the Soviet Union that was
the closest the Cold War came to escalating
into a full-scale nuclear war.
This event was connected to the failed Bay
of Pigs invasion of 1961, and the presence
of American ballistic missiles in Italy and
Turkey.
Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev decided to
agree to Cuba’s request to place nuclear
missiles on this island to deter future harassment
of Cuba.
In July 1962, Nikita Khrushchev and Fidel
Castro held a secret meeting and made an agreement
on building a number of missile launch facilities.
During those 13 days, the world was separated
into two alliances.
China announced that 650 million Chinese men
and women were standing by the Cuban people,
while West Germany and France supported the
United States.
In addition, John F. Kennedy believed that
only an invasion would remove the missiles
from Cuba, which is why the United States
were ready to start a war.
On October 27, after much deliberation between
the Soviet Union and Kennedy’s cabinet,
the U.S. President agreed to remove all missiles
set in Italy and Turkey.
In return, Khrushchev agreed on removing all
missiles in Cuba.
Speaking about this event, President Kennedy
told the following to Americans in June 1633:
“For, in the final analysis, our most basic
common link is that we all inhabit this small
planet.
We all breathe the same air.
We all cherish our children’s future, and
we are all mortal”.
One: The Black Death
Coming out of the East, the Black Death reached
the shores of Italy in the spring of 1348,
unleashing a rampage of death across Europe
unprecedented in recorded history.
By the time the epidemic played itself out
three years later, anywhere from 30-60% of
Europe’s population had fallen victim to
the pestilence.
In total, the plague may have reduced the
world population from an estimated 450 million
down to 350 million in the 14th century.
It is believed that the Black Death came from
Central Asia, as well as that it found its
way to Europe through the Silk Road.
Italy was the first country to face this plague,
followed by France, Spain, Portugal, and England.
In less than one year, the plague reached
Germany and Scandinavia.
The plague presented itself in several forms.
The bubonic variant brought swellings that
appeared on a victim’s neck, armpits or
groin.
These tumors could range in size from that
of an egg to that of an apple.
The manifestation of these symptoms signaled
that the victim had a life expectancy of up
to one week.
The pneumonic plague attacked the respiratory
system and was more virulent.
Life expectancy was measured in one or two
days.
Even though the Black Death took hundreds
of millions of lives, the plague-haunted Europe
and the Mediterranean throughout the 14th
to the 17th century.
It was reported that the plague was present
somewhere in Europe in every year between
1346 and 1671.
During those years, especially while the Black
Death haunted Europe, people were in a panic.
Doctors refused to see patients; Priests refused
to administer last rites; Shopkeepers closed
stores, and many people fled the cities to
the countryside.
Desperate to run away, many people abandoned
their sick and dying loved ones.
Feel free to add any kind of information about
other cases that might have endangered our
civilization.
If you find it mysterious, share and like
this video.
Also, be sure to subscribe because you don’t
want to miss what is coming next.
As always, thank you for watching.